A few months after the events of the previous film, it is the day of Bella Swan and Edward Cullen's wedding. They happily exchange vows and are married. During the reception, Jacob Black, who had left town upon receiving an invitation to the wedding, returns. Bella is pleasantly surprised to see him, and they share a dance in the woods. Bella admits that she and Edward plan to consummate their marriage on their honeymoon while she is still human. Jacob becomes furious, knowing that such an act could kill her.

After the wedding, Bella and Edward travel to Isle Esme for their honeymoon, and they make love for the first time. Two weeks after the wedding, Bella vomits after waking and notices her period is late. Carlisle, Edward's adoptive father, is told by Bella she believes she is pregnant. Edward is distraught, as it is highly unlikely a human will survive giving birth to a vampire's baby.

Edward tells Bella Carlisle should perform an abortion; she refuses, and convinces Edward's sister, Rosalie, to be her bodyguard. They fly back home to Forks, Washington. Jacob rushes to the Cullens' house and finds Bella pale, underweight, and visibly pregnant. He is upset by Bella's failing health, saying Carlisle should terminate the pregnancy as soon as possible to save her life. Bella opts to continue her pregnancy.

Jacob storms out of the Cullens' residence, shapeshifting and arranges a meeting in the woods with his packmates regarding Bella's pregnancy. Sam believes the baby will not be able to control its craving for human blood once it is born. He thinks they should kill Bella to ensure that her unborn child does not harm anyone. Jacob does not want any harm to come to Bella because he still has feelings for her and she has done nothing wrong. Sam believes if they do not kill Bella, her unborn child will. Disagreement over this issue causes Jacob and a few other wolves to disperse from Sam's pack to form their own.

As Bella's pregnancy progresses, her health declines rapidly. However, a snide comment from Jacob makes her realize the baby is craving blood. When she begins drinking human blood obtained by Carlisle from the hospital, her health improves. Bella's pregnancy continues to progress at an alarming rate; as a half-vampire, the fetus's development is far more accelerated than that of a human fetus. Edward's dislike for the baby dissolves as he notices he can read the baby's thoughts.

Bella is sharing her ideas about baby names with Edward and Jacob when she collapses. Edward, Jacob, and Rosalie begin performing an emergency cesarean section, as Carlisle is out obtaining blood. The procedure is excruciatingly painful for Bella, and she falls unconscious. Following the procedure, Bella wakes up and sees her healthy newborn daughter. After she chooses Renesmee (a combination of her mother's name and Edward's mother's name) as the baby's name, Bella's heart stops.

Jacob desperately attempts CPR. Edward injects Bella's heart with his venom in an attempt to transform her into a vampire, but his action appears to be futile as Bella remains lifeless. Panicked, Edward begins chest compressions. A distraught Jacob decides to kill Renesmee, as he believes she was the cause of Bella's death; however, when they look into each other's eyes, he imprints on her. The imprint prevents the werewolves from killing Renesmee, as their most absolute law is not to harm anyone who has been imprinted on.

Bella is cleaned and dressed. Over the course of two days, her injuries heal and her figure returns to normal. Finally, the transformation is complete; her eyes open, and they are blood-red. Bella has become a vampire.

In a post-credits scene, the Volturi's secretary, Bianca, delivers a message from Carlisle. Aro reads the message, which basically states about Bella and Edward's wedding and Bella's transformation into a vampire. Aro has Bianca killed by Demetri and Felix for spelling Carlisle's name without an 's'. The two other Volturi banter about how Carlisle is growing his coven and that the Volturis' dispute with the Cullens is over. However, Aro disagrees, saying they still have something he wants.